.TH SOTFS-FUSE 1 "May 2026" "sotfs 0.2.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
sotfs-fuse \- mount a sotFS type-graph filesystem via FUSE
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B sotfs-fuse
.I MOUNTPOINT
.RB [ --db
.IR PATH ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B sotfs-fuse
mounts a content-addressed type-graph filesystem at
.I MOUNTPOINT
using the FUSE userspace driver. Without
.BR --db ,
the mount is in-memory and ephemeral: the type graph is created fresh
on mount and discarded on unmount. With
.BR --db ,
the graph is loaded from
.IR PATH " (a "
.B redb
file) on mount and persisted back to it on unmount and on
.BR fsync (2).
.PP
The mount is restricted to the UID that ran
.B sotfs-fuse
by default; set
.B SOTFS_FUSE_ALLOW_OTHER=1
to opt into
.BR allow_other .
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI --db " PATH"
Persist the type graph to the redb-backed file
.IR PATH .
The file is created on first mount if it does not exist (use
.BR sotfsctl (1)
.B mkfs
to pre-allocate). On unmount and on every
.BR fsync (2)
the in-memory graph is serialized back to disk via
.BR redb 's
ACID transaction.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B SOTFS_FUSE_TTL_MS
Override the kernel-side entry/attr cache TTL in milliseconds (default:
1000). Set to 0 to disable cache amortization for benchmarking raw
upcall cost.
.TP
.B SOTFS_FUSE_ALLOW_OTHER
If set to any non-empty value, the mount is created with
.B allow_other
and
.BR auto_unmount ,
allowing other UIDs to access the filesystem. Off by default to
preserve POSIX per-user isolation.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I PATH
The redb database file used by
.BR --db .
Standard layout follows
.BR redb (3)
conventions; do not edit by hand. Use
.BR sotfsctl (1)
.B check
to verify integrity offline and
.BR sotfsctl (1)
.B dump
to inspect.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Ephemeral mount:
.EX
$ sotfs-fuse /tmp/mnt
.EE
.TP
Persistent mount:
.EX
$ sotfsctl mkfs /var/lib/sotfs/data.redb
$ sotfs-fuse /mnt/sotfs --db /var/lib/sotfs/data.redb &
$ ls /mnt/sotfs/
.EE
.TP
Benchmarking with attr cache disabled:
.EX
$ SOTFS_FUSE_TTL_MS=0 sotfs-fuse /tmp/mnt
.EE
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Successful mount and clean unmount.
.TP
.B 1
Mount failed (permissions, missing
.BR /dev/fuse ,
backend error).
.TP
.B 2
Invalid command-line arguments.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR sotfsctl (1),
.BR sotfs-export-hunter (1),
.BR fusermount3 (1),
.BR mount.fuse3 (8)
.SH STANDARDS
The implemented FUSE callbacks include
.BR lookup ", " getattr ", " setattr ", " readdir ", " mkdir ", "
.BR rmdir ", " create ", " unlink ", " rename ", " link ", " open ", "
.BR read ", " write ", " release ", " opendir ", " releasedir ", "
.BR symlink ", " readlink ", " statfs ", " access ", " fsync ", "
.BR flush ", " setxattr ", " getxattr ", " listxattr ", " removexattr .
Not yet implemented:
.BR mmap ", " ioctl ", " poll ", " fallocate ", " getlk / setlk ", "
.BR openat / getdents .
.SH BUGS
Report at https://github.com/sotomayorlucas/sotfs/issues.
